Home remedies for 'Indigestion':
5 gm crushed rhizome with salt or jaggery twice daily before meal.

Home remedies for 'Indigestion':
10 ml juice of fruit, 1 gm black salt or fried Jira powder with honey or sugar to hold inside mouth for sometime before food.

Home remedies for 'Indigestion':
2 gm powder of bark with water twice a day.

Home remedies for 'Indigestion':
20 ml decoction prepared from 5 gm coarse powder with a pinch of ginger powder thrice a day.

Home remedies for 'Indigestion':
5-6 gm powder of fried Jeera and rock-salt with warm water thrice daily.

Home remedies for 'Indigestion':
A pinch of powder with a piece of crushed ginger & rock salt should be taken before meal.

Home remedies for 'Indigestion':
5-10 ml juice of fruit twice daily.

Home remedies for 'Indigestion':
5-10 ml juice with a pinch of salt and pepper before food.

Home remedies for 'Indigestion':
2gm powder with guda twice daily before meal.

Home remedies for 'Indigestion':
3-5 gm powder with powder of fried Jeera and rock-salt with warm water thrice daily.

Home remedies for 'Indigestion':
5-10 ml juice twice or thrice daily.

Home remedies for 'Fever':
30 ml decoction from handful of curry leaves & 5 gm dhania thrice a day.

Home remedies for 'Cold/Cough':
2-5 gm powder of dry rhizome with jaggery the rice a day in divided doses. 10ml decoction prepared from a piece of ginger every morning prevents recurrent attack of cold.

Home remedies for 'Cold/Cough':
20 ml decoction prepared from 5 gm coarse powder sugar and turmeric powder thrice a day. or use of dhania powder as herbal tea every morning prevents cold, cough & problems related to digestion.

Home remedies for 'Cold/Cough':
20 ml decoction prepared from 5 gm Dhania, 1 gm Methi seeds, little turmeric powder should be taken 2-3 times/day. Little elaichi powder with a tea spoon full of honey 3-4 times day. Even chewing elaichi (Not more than 3 per day) frequently is help full in dry as w ell as productive cough.


Home remedies for 'Cold/Cough':
Warm decoction of 2 gm jeera, 5 gm Dhania, 1 gm Haldi, 1 gm Methi powder and little pepper should be taken with honey/ sugar with lemon two to three times. Either decoction as mentioned above or chewing few grains frequently helps in dry as well as productive cough.

Home remedies for 'Cold/Cough':
5-10 ml juice twice or thrice a day with honey.

Home remedies for 'Acidity':
Take a tiny piece of jaggery (gur) every hour. Just keep it in the mouth and slowly suck it till acidity subsides. Drink coconut water 3-4 times a day. Have a plateful of watermelon (tarbooz) and/or cucumber (kheera) every hour.  Harad juice, 1-2 teaspoon daily after meals is very effective in controlling acidity. The juice can be mixed with an equal amount of amla juice for better results. To take out amla juice , grate an amla and squeeze the pulp through a clean muslin cloth to get juice. Chewing a piece of harad is an age old remedy.

Home remedies for 'Acne':
coconut water 3-4 times a day. Have a plateful of watermelon (Clean face with cotton wool dipped in rose water 2-3 times a day. Do not use soap. Orange peel is very good in the treatment of acne. Grind the peel with some water to a paste and apply on affected parts. when oranges are not in season, you may use a powder of dried orange peels. For this, when oranges are in season, dry orange peels in shade. Powder finely in a grinder and sift it to make it a very fine powder. Store in an air tight bottle for future use. Mix 1 teaspoon lemon juice in 1 teaspoon finely ground cinnamon (dalchini) powder and apply on affected areas frequently. Sift the cinnamon (dalchini) powder to make it into a very fine powder. Crush a fegarlic (lasan) flakes and apply on the face, once or twice a day. Swallowing 1-2 flakes of ragarlic regularly helps further. Grind some neem leaves with water to a fine paste. Apply on infected area. Make a paste of ½ teaspoon each of sandalwood and turmeric (haldi) powder in a little water and apply.

Home remedies for 'Anaemia':
Avoid drinking tea and coffee immediately after meals as the tannin present in these interferes in the absorption of iron from the food.  Take freshly prepared apple juice an hour before meals or just before retiring for the night. For proper absorption of the juice, remember the stomach should be relatively empty when you have the juice and also do not take anything for about half an hour after the juice. Juice of beetroot taken 1-2 times daily is an excellent remedy for anaemia especially for children and teenagers. You may combine apple and beetroot for the juice. Mix 1 tablespoon amla juice with a ripe mashed banana and eat 2-3 times a day. Have a ripe banana with 1 tablespoon honey, 1-2 times a day. Soak 8-10 almonds (badam) and 1 teaspoon rice overnight. Remove outer skin of almonds and grind to a fine paste. Boil with 1½ cups of milk and a pinch of turmeric powder (haldi). Sweeten with sugar and drink for a fedays, once a day. Soak 10-12 currants (munakas) in water overnight. Remove seeds and eat them. Have for 2-4 weeks. Have spinach juice of 125 gm spinach everyday, for 2-3 weeks. Foods rich in iron are - honey, almonds, bananas, apricots (khurmani), raisins (kishmish), fenugreek (methi) leaves, fenugreek seeds (methi daana), lettuce or salad leaves, onion, spinach (paalak), grapes, tomatoes, carrots, gooseberry (amla), beetroots (chokunder), apples, pomegranate (anaar). Have plenty of them if you are anaemic.

Home remedies for 'Angina Pectoris':
Thoroughly mix 2 teaspoons almond oil with 1 teaspoon rose oil. Rub gently on the chest, morning and evening. Boil 1 teaspoon fenugreek seeds (methi dana) in 1½ cups water. Strain and add 2 teaspoon honey. Take twice daily.

Home remedies for 'Animal bite':
Take ½ teaspoon ground black cumin seeds (shah jeera), twice daily. Ankle - swelling & pain Mix equal quantities of castor oil and lime juice. Massage the affected area with this mixture. Also drink 1 cup warm water mixed with lime juice and honey.

Home remedies for 'Appetite loss (Anorexia)':
Mix and powder equal quantities of carom seeds (ajwain), fennel seeds (saunf), dried ginger powder (sonth), salt and black cumin seeds (shah jeera).Mix a teaspoon of this } powder and a teaspoon of hot ghee to cooked rice and eat frequently . Take 2 teaspoon of amla juice and mix it with 2 teaspoon honey and 2 teaspoon lime juice. Add 1 cup water and drink on an empty stomach every morning. To take out juice from fresh amla, remove seeds from fresh amla and grind the pulp into a fine paste. Tie it in a muslin cloth and squeeze out the juice. whenever fresh fruits are not available, dried amla can be used. Soak 1 tablespoon of dried amla at night in a cup of water. Strain it the next morning. Add 1/8 teaspoon black pepper powder (kali Mirch) and 2 teaspoon lime juice. Dilute it if necessary with water and drink every morning regularly on an empty stomach. Take ½ teaspoon black pepper powder (kali mirch) and 1 tablespoon jaggery powder (shakkar) mixed together. Kali mirch Cut 1" piece ginger (adrak) into small pieces. Add 1½ cups of water. Boil. Simmer for 2-3 minutes. Add milk and sugar to taste, and take it frequently like tea.


Home remedies for 'Asthma':
Mix 1 teaspoon honey with ½ teaspoon cinnamon (dalchini) powder and have at night before going to bed. Boil carom seeds (ajwain) in water and inhale the steam. Boil 8-10 flakes of garlic (lasan) in ½ cup of milk. Have this every night. Gives excellent results in early stages of asthma. Add a handful of drumstick leaves (sahijan) to 1 cup water. Boil. Simmer on loflame for 3-4 minutes. Cool and strain. Add salt, pepper and lemon juice to taste. Have every day, once or twice a day. wAn expectorant and a very effective remedy for asthma is prepared by boiling 6 cloves (laung) in 3 tablespoons of water. Take 1 teaspoon of this decoction with a little honey, thrice daily. Mix ¼ teaspoon asafetida (hing), 2 teaspoon honey, ½ teaspoon juice from betel leaf (paan ka patta), ½ teaspoon white onion juice. Have it 2-3 times a day. To take out juice from betel leaf, Clove flowers crush to a paste and squeeze through a clean muslin cloth. For onion juice, grate the onion and squeeze through a clean muslin cloth. Mix equal amounts of fresh ginger (adrak) juice, honey & pomegranate (anaar) juice. Take 1 tablespoon, 1-2 times a day. Figs (anjeer) are known to give relief by draining the phlegm (balgam). Take 3-4 dry figs, wash them well with warm water. Soak overnight in a cup of water. Eat them first thing in the morning and also drink the water. Do this for at least 2 months.

Home remedies for 'Backache':
Rub some ginger paste on the affected area. Apply oil of eucalyptus on it.

Home remedies for 'Bad Odour':
Use neem twigs as tooth paste. Powder the dried mint (pudina) leaves. Use as toothpowder.

Home remedies for 'Baldness':
Boil 1 cup mustard oil (sarson ka tel) with 4 tablespoon henna (mehendi) leaves. Filter and bottle. Massage on the bald patches regularly. Grind the remains of tobacco smoked in a hookah and add to boiling mustard oil. Cool and store. Massage on the bald patches regularly. Rub on the scalp 1 teaspoon oil in which raw mangoes have been preserved for over one year. Repeat this treatment frequently. Grind 1 tablespoon liquorice root pieces (mulathi) in 1 cup milk with ¼ teaspoon saffron (kesar). Apply this paste on bald patches at bedtime continuously. Grind fenugreek seeds (methi dana), with water and apply on the head. Leave for at least 40 minutes before washing. Do it every morning for a month. Bed sores w Apply honey on the length and breadth of a banana leaf and lie on it for a few hours. Ensure its contact with the affected parts.


Home remedies for 'Bed wetting in children':
Give 2 walnut halves (akhrot giri) and 1 teaspoon of kishmish to the child before sleeping for 10-12 days. Belching (dakaar) Grind 2 teaspoon each carom seeds (ajwain) and dried ginger (adrak) into a fine powder. Add a little black salt (kala namak). Take 1 teaspoon of this mixture with 1 cup warm water frequently.

Home remedies for 'Blackheads':
Mix 1 teaspoon lime juice in 1 teaspoon finely ground cinnamon (dalchini) powder and apply on affected areas frequently. Mix 1 teaspoon each turmeric (haldi) powder and juice of fresh coriander (dhania) leaves and apply daily as a face pack before going to sleep.

Home remedies for 'Bladder Stones':
Boil 2 figs (anjeer) in 1 cup of water. Drink daily for a month.

Home remedies for 'Blood Deficiency':
Take 2 teaspoon of amla juice and mix it with two teaspoonfuls each of honey and lime. Add 1 teacup water and drink on an empty stomach every morning. Whenever fresh fruits are not available, dried amla can be used. Soak 1 tablespoon the previous night in a cup of water. (Note: The treatment should continue for at least 120 days to achieve expected results.) Mix 1 tablespoon juice of amla with a ripe mashed banana and eat twice or three times a day. Soak 2 or 3 dried figs (anjeer) in 1 teacup water. Eat them along with milk next morning for a month. Blood pressure _ lowHave juice of 10-15 basil (tulsi) leaves mixed with 1 teaspoon honey. Crush the leaves to a paste and squeeze out the juice through a muslin cloth. blood pressure - high  See "HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE" on page 60 Blood sugar w Take 2-3 garlic (lasan) cloves for a few days regularly. Body and Muscles developmentSoak 2 almonds, 5 pista kernels and 1 teaspoon poppy seeds (khuskhus) in 1 cup cow's milk for an hour. Grind. Add some more warm milk. Take daily for 3 months. Body dry itch Grind 1 tablespoon poppy seeds (khuskhus) with 1 teaspoon water. Add 1 teaspoon lime juice. Apply on the affected areas.

Home remedies for 'Body Heat':
Add 2 to 3 drops of almonds oil to pomegranate (anaar) juice and drink. Soak 8 to 10 almonds and 1 teaspoon rice overnight. Remove the outer skin. Grind into a fine paste. Mix with some milk and add a pinch of turmeric powder (haldi) and sugar candy (mishri) to taste. Boil and drink. Remove seeds from fresh amla fruits and grind the pulp into a fine paste. Tie it in a muslin cloth and squeeze out the juice. Take 2 teaspoon of this juice and mix it with two teaspoonfuls each honey and lime juice. Add 1 cup water and drink on an empty stomach every morning. Take a tender bel fruit. Grind it with 1 cup milk. Apply on the head and massage well before taking a shower.

Home remedies for 'Body Pain':
Boil 3 tablespoon powdered nutmeg (jaiphal) in 1 cup sesame oil (til ka tel). Cool and apply on affected parts.

Home remedies for 'Boils':
Slightly roast a big onion on a naked flame. Mash it and mix in teaspoon each turmeric powder and ghee. Apply and tie a bandage. Mash the garlic (lasan) cloves and apply externally. Ground neem leaves into a paste and apply on affected parts. Apply a paste of ginger (adrak) powder and turmeric (haldi) (1:1) on boils. Grind some black cumin (kala jeera) seeds in a little water and apply the paste on the affected areas. Heat black pepper powder in ½ teaspoon ghee until charred. Use this as an ointment. Take fenugreek leaf (methi patta) paste, heat it and when lukewarm, apply on the affected parts of the body. Soak bread in warm milk and sandwich the mixture in-between the folds of a clean cotton cloth. Apply this poultice to the boil and hold in place with a cotton bandage. This draws the dirt to the surface of the skin and simultaneously bursts the boil.

Home remedies for 'Body Swelling':
Grind black cumin seeds (shah jeera) with a little hot water and apply on affected parts. Body weak ness w Soak 8 to 10 almonds and 1 teaspoon rice overnight. Remove the outer skin of almonds. Grind into a fine paste. Mix in some milk and a pinch of turmeric powder (haldi). Boil and drink along with sugar candy (mishri) or ordinary sugar to taste. Sprinkle the following on a platter of mango slices : 1 teaspoon honey, a pinch of saffron (kesar), cardamom (chhoti illaichi) and rose water (gulab jal). Take twice daily.

Home remedies for 'Breathing problem':
Mix 1 teaspoon camphor (kapoor) in ½ cup slightly warmed coconut oil and apply on the chest. Boil 2 tablespoon fennel seeds (saunf) in 1 cup water till it is reduced to half. Filter. Take 1 tablespoon every morning and evening for a few days. Boil 3 tablespoon powdered nutmeg (jaiphal) in 1 cup sesame oil (til ka tel). Cool and apply on affected parts.

Home remedies for 'Bronchitis in children':
Mix 1 teaspoon oil of garlic (lasan) and 3 teaspoon honey and give a small amount three times a day to the child.

Home remedies for 'Burns by hot water':
Take the thin buds of banana leaves. Bandage directly on affected areas. Tie the upper part for two days and then lower parts for two more days. burns, scar. Boil 1 cup neem bark (neem ki khal) in 4 cups water. Remove from fire and shake liquid. Apply the emerging froth on the affected area. Repeat several times and for several days.

Home remedies for 'Body Burns':
Mash a ripe banana and apply on burns. Bandage with betel leaves (pan ka patta). If you have a minor burn, immediately place an ice pack on the burnt area for 10 minutes. Combine 4 teaspoon each of lime juice, coconut oil and rub until the betel leaves mixture turns white. Apply on affected parts. Apply curry leaves (kari patta) as poultices over affected areas. Spread a thin layer of honey over the burn and cover with a dressing. Repeat this regularly every two or three hours till it heals. Burns by fire Immediately apply glycerine on the burnt area. Burn a handful of mango leaves to ashes and apply this on the affected parts.

Home remedies for 'Bruises':
Slice a raw onion & place over the bruise. Do not apply this to broken skin.

Home remedies for 'Cataract At Early Stages':
Mix 1 teaspoon rose water (gulab jal) with 1 teaspoon fresh lime juice. Add 10 drops of this to the eyes.

Home remedies for 'Chest Congestion':
Add to ½ litre of boiling water, 1 teaspoon carom seeds (ajwain) powder along with 1 teaspoon turmeric (haldi) powder. Cool. Take 1 tablespoon of this mixture along with 1 teaspoon honey.

Home remedies for 'Chickenpox In Early Stage':
Include figs (anjeer) in your diet every day. Children irritability Rub a nutmeg (jaiphal) lightly against a smooth grinding stone in milk and feed children who cry out at night without any apparent reasons.

Home remedies for 'Chills':
Instead of your regular hot tea or coffee, have a glass of hot water mixed with honey and lemon. Put a teaspoon of honey, lemon juice and a little grated ginger in a glass and add hot water. Stir and drink.

Home remedies for 'High Cholesterol':
Finely dice an onion and mix it with 1 cup buttermilk along with ¼ teaspoon black pepper (kali mirch) powder and drink. Regularly intake garlic (lasan) cloves for a few days. Regularly intake coriander (dhania) decoction made by boiling 2 teaspoon dry seed powder in 1 cup water. (Milk and sugar can be added to improve its taste. This could be a welcome substitute for tea or coffee.)

Home remedies for 'Cough':
Mix equal amounts of honey and ginger (adrak) juice. For better results warm the mixture a little & then have it. Have 1 teaspoon, 2-3-4 times a day. Three pepper corns (saboot kali mirch) sucked with a pinch of black cumin (shah jeera) and a pinch of salt gives relief. Mix 1 teaspoon pepper powder with 4 teaspoon gur (jaggery). Make small balls. Suck 3-4 balls/tablets during the day. Mix equal amounts of pepper powder and sugar candy (mishri) by weight. Mix enough pure ghee to form small balls. Suck one ball/tablet 3-4 times a day. Avoid - curd, bananas, ice, rice fried and cold foods. 1 teaspoon of basil (tulsi) leaves juice 2-3 times a day for children. Tulsi leaves can be crushed to a paste and the paste squeezed through a clean muslin cloth to get juice. Mix a pinch of turmeric (haldi) with warm 1 cup milk and have at night.

Home remedies for 'Constipation In Adults':
A healthy stomach is a healthy body'. Many diseases have their roots in the digestive system. Constipation is a very common problem affecting a lot of people. Wrong eating habits, sedentary lifestyle & sluggish intestines are the main reasons. If the stomach is not cleared well, it leads to a lot of problems such as headaches, gas etc. However, use of laxatives should be discouraged as it is habit forming and also harmful in the long run. Here are some tips to relieve you of your problem. (It will take some time but be persistent and you will surely benefit) Take a hot glass of water with 1 teaspoon honey and juice of ½ a lemon first thing in the morning. Drink one litre of water first thing in the morning. Soak 6-8 dates (khajoor) in a cup of water at night. Churn in the mixer in the morning & drink first thing in the morning. Consume approx. 250-300 gms fresh grapes (angoor) every day. When not in season, soak 12-15 raisins (kishmish) in water and have them. Raisins should be soaked for 24-48 hours and eaten early in the morning. The water in which they are soaked should also be drunk. Simply eat a few liquorice (mulathi) sticks. One of its many properties is that it is a natural laxative.

Home remedies for 'Constipation for small children':
Soak 6-8 raisins (kishmish) in hot water (depending on the age). When cool, crush well and strain. When given routinely even to little infants, it helps to regulate bowel movement (however care should be taken - so as not to give too much otherwise the child will get loose motions.) Consumption of 6-8 apricots (khurmani) a day or 2-3 cucumbers (kheera) a day or 1-2 bananas a day is also very useful. Bulk forming vegetables like carrots, radish, spinach, cabbage or roughage creating things should be consumed. Instead of juice always opt for eating the fruit. Whole wheat flour should be used and processed foods (maida, cheese, confectionery) should be avoided. Taking 2-3 teaspoon of isabgol in milk or warm water either first thing in the morning or at bed time is very beneficial. Mix ½ teaspoon honey to ½ - 1 cup warm water and have it 2-3 times a day.

Home remedies for 'Colic in Babies':
Boil a teaspoon of fennel seeds (saunf) in a cup of water. Boil for 2-3 minutes and keep it to cool for 15-20 minutes. Strain. Add 1-2 teaspoon to every feed of milk of the baby. It helps cure colic.

Home remedies for 'Cold':
A lemon a day keeps the cold away. For a bad cold, the juice of two lemons in ½ a litre (2½ cups) of boiling water sweetened with honey, taken at bed time, is a very effective remedy. Have ginger (adrak) tea. Cut ginger (adrak) into 1" _ 1½" pieces and boil with a cup of water. Give 8-10 boils. Strain, sweeten with ½ teaspoon sugar and drink hot. A tablespoon of carom seeds (ajwain) crushed and tied up in a muslin cloth can be used for inhalation to relieve congestion/blocked nose. A similar small bundle placed near the pillow of sleeping children relieves congestion. A teaspoon of cumin seeds (jeera) is added to 1 glass of boiling water. Strain and simmer for a few minutes. Let it cool. Drink it 1-2 times a day. If sore throat is also present, add a few small pieces of dry ginger (adrak) to the boiling water. Six pepper corns (saboot kali mirch) finely ground and mixed with a glass of warm water, sweetened with 5-6 batasha (a variation of sugar candy) can be taken for a few nights. In the case of the acute cold in the head, boil 1 tablespoon full pepper powder in a cup of milk along with a pinch of turmeric (haldi) and have once daily for at least 3 days. cold with phlegm (balgam) and slight cough. Take 8-10 tulsi leaves and wash well. To 1 cup of water, add these tulsi leaves, 1-2 cloves of garlic (lasan), ½" piece ginger, crushed and 4-5 peppercorns (saboot kali mirch). Boil the water and keep simmering on fire till the quantity is reduced to ¼ cup. Cool. Strain. Add 1 teaspoon honey. Drink this every morning.

Home remedies for 'Muscular Cramps':
Apply clove oil (laung ka tel) on the affected parts.

Home remedies for 'Deafness':
Use raw onion juice as ear drops. Put two drops of lukewarm neem oil inside the ear.

Home remedies for 'Dandruff':
Soak 2 tablespoon fenugreek seeds (methi dana) in water overnight. In the morning grind into a fine paste. Apply all over scalp and leave for ½ an hour. Wash with Shikakai or mild shampoo. Boil a handful of neem leaves in 4 teacups of water. After cooling and filtering use for rinsing hair Dehydration due to diarrhoea Soak half a nutmeg (jaiphal) in 2 cups water for over 2-3 hours. Take 1 teaspoon of this infusion and mix in 1 cup fresh coconut water. Drink twice or thrice a day.

Home remedies for 'Dehydration':
Add ¼ teaspoon salt, 3 teaspoon brown sugar or ordinary sugar and 2 teaspoon lime juice to 1 cup of water, mix well and drink.

Home remedies for 'Diabetes':
For diabetes, diet restriction & light exercise like walking is a must as this controls the sugar level. Grape fruit is a splendid thing in the diet of a diabetic. Have 3 fruits at a time, 3 times daily. A tablespoon of amla juice mixed with a cup of fresh bitter gourd (karela ) juice and taken daily for 2 months will reduce blood sugar. Take dry tender leaves of the mango tree in the shade. Powder and preserve them. Half a teaspoon of this powder twice a day in the morning and evening proves beneficial. 3-4 teaspoons juice of bitter gourd (karela), taken every morning on an empty stomach gives good results. Coarsely powder fenugreek seeds (methi dana) and have 1-2 teaspoon in the morning everyday. (Vary dosage according to individual tolerance level). Eating 10 fresh fully grown curry leaves (kari patta) every morning for 3 months is said to prevent diabetes due to heredity factors. Soak 2 teaspoon fenugreek seeds (methi dana) in 1 cup water at night. Drink this water first thing in the morning and preferably eat the seeds too. Chew 8-10 basil (tulsi) leaves in the morning.

Home remedies for 'Guidelines of a Diabetics Diet':
Eat plenty of vegetables like lettuce (salaad patta), tomato and fruits. Use the following fruits and vegetables sparingly and with caution: banana, seedless grapes (angoor), cheeku, leechi, custard apple (sharifa), dry fruits, mango, raisins (kishmish), potatoes, jackfruit (kathal), carrots (gajar), peas (mattar), beans, sweet potato (shakarkandi), beetroot (chukandar). Foods rich in fibre should be preferred. Daily intake of calories should be restricted.Use proteins moderately. Milk & nuts intake to be restricted to the minimum whereas have plenty of curds and buttermilk (chhach). Avoid all refined foods & sweets. Drink 8-10 glasses of water daily.

Home remedies for 'Depression':
Boil ¼ teaspoon powdered cardamom (chhoti illaichi) seeds in thin tea water and drink. Mix 1/8 teaspoon nutmeg (jaiphal) powder with 1 tablespoon freshly extracted amla juice. Take 3 times a day.

Home remedies for 'Dental Problems':
Turmeric (haldi), burnt, and finely powdered, can be used as toothpowder.

Home remedies for 'Delivery Of Babies':
Mix 3 teaspoon lime juice, ¼ teaspoon powdered black pepper and 1 teaspoon honey in 1 cup water. Drink for 3 months.

Home remedies for 'Diarrhoea':
Combine 1 teaspoon each powdered ginger (adrak), powdered cumin (jeera) and powdered cinnamon (dalchini) with honey and make into a thick paste. Take 1 teaspoon thrice daily. Boil 1 teaspoon cumin seeds (jeera) in a glass of water. Add to this 1 teaspoon fresh juice of coriander leaves (dhania) and a pinch of salt. Drink twice daily after meals for 2-3 days. Mash 1 ripe banana along with a pinch of salt and 1 teaspoon tamarind pulp (imli ka guda). Take twice a day. Drinking a strong cup of unsweetened black tea is very effective for stopping diarrhoea. Peel an apple and shred it. Keep the shredded pieces in a plate for approximately 20 minutes until they turn brown in colour, and then eat them. Slice the tender unripe bel fruit. Sun dry them. Powder the slices. Take 1 teaspoon along with warm water twice a day. Take every night, 3 cloves of garlic (lasan), chopped and boiled in milk. Make a paste of 1 green chilli along with 2 tablespoon lime juice and ½ teaspoon camphor (kapur). Take ¼ teaspoon of this paste. 2 or 3 teaspoon coriander seeds (saboot dhania) soaked overnight in water and taken next morning with 1 cup buttermilk (chhach). Boil ¼ teaspoon powdered cardamom (chhoti illaichi) seeds in thin tea water and drink. Mix juice of 15-20 tender curry leaves (curry patta) with 1 teaspoon honey and drink. Apply ginger (adrak) juice around the navel. Insert ¼ teaspoon nutmeg (jaiphal) powder inside a ripe banana and eat.

Home remedies for 'Diarrhea due to indigestion of food':
Insert ¼ teaspoon nutmeg (jaiphal) powder inside a ripe banana and eat. Dog-bite Take ½ teaspoon powder of black cumin seeds (shah jeera) twice daily.

Home remedies for 'Ear Infection':
Extract 1 teaspoon juice from mango leaves. Slightly warm and use as ear drops when bearably hot.

Home remedies for 'Boils inside Ear':
Heat 2 teaspoon mustard oil. Add ½ teaspoon carom (ajwain) seeds and one or two flakes of crushed garlic (lasan). Boil till they turn red. Filter. Use as ear drops.

Home remedies for 'For Ear pain due to boils use the folowing :':
Heat 1 teaspoon each of garlic (lasan) and carom seeds (ajwain) in 2 tablespoon gingelly oil (til ka tel) till they turn red in colour. Strain and cool. When cooled to body temperature, put some drops into the ears.

Home remedies for 'Eye Aching':
Powder equal quantities of liquorice (mulathi) and cumin (jeera). Take ¼ teaspoon every day along with 1 teaspoon honey for a month. Eyes burning w Mash 1 ripe banana along with a little curd and water; take twice a day. Mix equal quantities of fenugreek seed (methi daana) powder along with Shikakai powder for washing hair. Wash frequently. Grind an onion with 1 teaspoon each black pepper and poppy seeds (khuskhus) soaked in ½ cup milk. Apply this paste on the head. Allow it to dry for 15-20 minutes. Wash in warm water. Mix the juice of bottle gourd (karela) and sesame oil (til ka tel) in the ratio of 4:1, and heat till the moisture is evaporated completely. Once cool, use it for massaging the head.

Home remedies for 'Exhaustion due to overwork':
Boil ¼ teaspoon powdered cardamom (chhoti illaichi) seeds in thin tea water and drink.

Home remedies for 'Epilepsy':
Apply fresh lime juice on the head. Massage well before showering off.

Home remedies for 'Eczema':
Rub a nutmeg (jaiphal) against a smooth stone slab with a little water and make a paste. Apply on affected parts. (Note: It is believed by some rural, old fashioned practitioners that instead of water, one's own early morning saliva can be used for better results.) Add 1 teaspoon camphor (kapoor) to 1 teaspoon sandalwood paste and apply on the affected areas.

Home remedies for 'Eyes Having Dark Circles Around Them':
Take one teaspoon tomato juice, ½ teaspoon lemon juice, a pinch of turmeric (haldi) powder & a little gram flour (besan). Make a paste & apply. Leave for 10 minute & wash off. Drink tomato juice with a few mint leaves, little lemon juice & salt w Soak cotton wool in cucumber (kheera) or potato juice & apply around the eyes. You will find a change in 2-3 weeks. Eyes strain due to TV watching Boil ½ teaspoon fennel seeds (saunf) in a cup of water till it is reduced to half. Cool. Use as eye drops (Caution: Beware of contamination).

Home remedies for 'Tired Eyes':
Lavender oil offers gentle relief for tired and strained eyes. Add a drop of lavender oil to 500 ml (2½ cups) of water and shake the solution well. Dip two cotton wool pads in the liquid, squeeze out the excess water and place one pad over each eye. If you wear contact lenses, they must be removed beforehand.

Home remedies for 'Eyesight Weakness':
Mix seeds of cardamom (chhoti illaichi) along with 1 tablespoon honey. Eat every day. Boil 2 tablespoon fenugreek (methi) leaves along with ½ cup moong dal and 10 small onions and eat regularly. Mix equal quantities of fenugreek seeds (methi dana) powder along with Shikakai powder for washing hair. Wash frequently.

Home remedies for 'Fainting':
A hot poultice of carom seeds (ajwain) used as dry fomentation for hands and feet.

Home remedies for 'Fatigue':
Take a glass of grapefruit and lemon juice in equal parts to dispel fatigue and general tiredness after a day's work.

Home remedies for 'Feet Burning':
Mash 1 ripe banana along with a little curd and water; take twice a day.

Home remedies for 'Feet / Sole Having Cracks':
Mix equal quantities of glycerin and lemon juice. Apply every night before going to bed. This mixture can be made and stored in a glass bottle. Massage your feet with castor oil every night (in winters) for 2-3 minutes and then wear socks at night. Grind equal amounts of neem leaves & turmeric (haldi). Apply on affected area. Finely grind a handful of henna (mehendi) leaves. Add 2 tablespoon lemon juice and apply on the feet. Mix the juice of bottle gourd (lauki) and sesame oil (til ka tel) in the ratio 4:1 and heat till all the moisture has evaporated. Bottle and use over cracked skin.

Home remedies for 'Feet Smelling':
Soak feet in strong tea for 20 minutes every day until the smell disappears. To prepare your footbath, brew two tea bags in 500 ml (2½ cups) of water for 15 minutes and pour the tea into a basin containing two litres of cool water.

Home remedies for 'Foot Corns':
Tie a fresh slice of lemon over the corn (painful area) and keep it all night. Massage castor oil on the corns every morning and night before sleeping. Massage for 2-3 minutes so that the oil gets absorbed. In 3-4 weeks the corns will disappear. Mash 1-2 cloves (laung) & garlic (lasan) and tie over the corns. Keep overnight.

Home remedies for 'Athlete's Foot':
Keeping your feet clean and dry is enough to discourage the growth of this fungal infection. Remember, it is infectious and you must keep and wash your shoes, socks and towel separately. To soothe the broken areas of your feet, simply soak them for 10 minutes in a footbath of apple cider vinegar mixed with water.

Home remedies for 'Flatulence':
Soak 3 tablespoon carom (ajwain) seeds in an adequate quantity of lime juice and dry in the shade. When fully dried, powder with a little black salt. Take 1 teaspoon of this mixture twice daily for a few days with a little warm water.

Home remedies for 'Fever':
Extract 1 teaspoon each juice of tulsi leaves and bel flowers. Add 1 teaspoon honey. Take twice a day. Tea made by boiling 1 teaspoon fenugreek seeds (methi dana), taken twice or thrice a day provides excellent remedy. (A little honey or lemon juice can be added to improve the flavour). Grind a few roots of the mango tree into a fine paste and apply on the palm and soles of the patients. The neem leaf decoction taken with pepper powder lowers temperature. ½ teaspoon ground pepper is mixed in warm water along with 1 teaspoon palm candy (sugar obtained from palm). This drink is taken at bedtime. w Fruit juice taken frequently. Regular intake of a pinch of saffron (kesar). Apply sandalwood paste on the forehead to bring the temperature down. Boil 2 tablespoon fennel seeds (saunf) in 1 teacup water till it is reduced to half. Filter. Take 1 tablespoon every morning and evening for a few days. (This filtrate, when used to wash the eyes frequently, is reported to strengthen the eye muscles. It is a good cleansing lotion for inflamed eyes.)

Home remedies for 'Fever of unknown origin':
Boil 1 tablespoon tulsi leaves with 1 teaspoon powdered cardamom (chhoti illaichi) in 2 teacups water. Take 1 cup of this decoction with milk and sugar to taste 2 or 3 times a day.

Home remedies for 'Feverishness':
Mix 1 teacup fresh lemon juice in tender coconut water and drink.

Home remedies for 'Gas Problem':
Some people are allergic or have intolerance for milk, milk products and wheat, wheat products but go through life without ever realizing this and keep suffering from acute gas trouble. Lactose intolerance (from milk) is being recognized in the west as also gluten intolerance (from wheat). Hence giving up these two things may greatly benefit you. Instead of wheat you can have rice or chapatis of maize, jawar or bajara. w Mix ¼ teaspoon dry ginger powder (sonth) with a pinch of asafoetida (hing).

Home remedies for 'Golden Rules for Gas Patients':
Avoid heavy (fried), spicy food. Do not eat very large meals, instead eat small meals. Try to eat a little, every 2 hours, so that the gap between the meals is not too big. Do some exercise. Even a walk will do wonders.

Home remedies for 'Gastroenteritis':
A decoction of 15-20 tulsi leaves taken along with a pinch of rock salt (kala namak) helps in the cure.

Home remedies for 'Giddiness':
Soak cumin seeds (jeera) in lime juice overnight. Keep this mixture under the sun till completely dry. Bottle it. Chew ½ teaspoon of this mixture and drink with a glass of warm water.

Home remedies for 'Giddiness due to blood pressure':
Soak 1 teaspoon each of powdered amla, coriander seeds (saboot dhania) and sandalwood in a cup of water overnight. Strain and drink the next day. Continue for a few days.

Home remedies for 'Gouty Pains':
Mix mustard oil and rectified alcohol (1 part oil to 40 parts alcohol) and use as a lotion. Make a poultice of ground fenugreek seeds (methi dana); use on the affected part.

Home remedies for 'Hair Dullness And Coarseness':
Grind fresh fenugreek leaves (methi) to a paste and apply the leaf paste over the scalp before a bath.

Home remedies for 'Hair Falling':
Take a handful of neem leaves and boil them in 4 cups water. After cooling and filtering, use the decoction for rinsing hair. Mix equal quantities of dried curry leaves (curry patta), lime peel (nimbu ka chilka), Shikakai, fenugreek seeds (methi daana) & green gram (moong saboot) and grind them finely. Store and use as a substitute for soap or shampoo. Apply fenugreek (methi) seeds, ground with some water and the paste on the head. Allow to soak at least for 40 minutes before washing. Use every morning for a month.

Home remedies for 'Hair Loss':
Apply a little almond oil (badam ka tel) on scalp frequently and massage.

Home remedies for 'Hair Greying':
Wet a lemon half and rub lemon juice into the scalp well. Wash off after it turns dry. Grind 1 tablespoon each, pulp of amla and lime juice. Massage this into the hair before going to bed. Wash it next morning. Soak shredded ginger (adrak) in honey. Eat a spoonful every morning.

Home remedies for 'Hair Thinning':
Bathe the hair in 1 cup coconut milk twice or thrice a week for a few months.

Home remedies for 'Head heaviness':
Grind the fresh amla fruits into a fine paste and apply on affected parts. Grind 2 to 3 cloves (laung) into a fine paste along with ½ teaspoon dried ginger (sonth) and apply on nose, forehead, etc.

Home remedies for 'Headache':
Roast some ajwain dry on a tawa. Tie it in a muslin bag and sniff frequently. Make a paste of 2-3 powdered cloves (laung) and salt. Apply this paste on the forehead. A paste made of dry ginger (sonth) with a little water or milk when applied to the forehead also gives relief. A ripe apple, after removing the upper rind and the inner hard portion should be taken with a little salt every morning on an empty stomach. Continue for a week. This yields good results even in case of chronic headaches. Mix 1 teaspoon finely ground cinnamon (dalchini) in 1 teaspoon water and apply on the forehead. It is very effective in headache due to exposure to cold air. Crush an onion and apply the paste on the head. Grind 10-15 tulsi leaves with 4 cloves (laung) and 1 teaspoon dried ginger (sonth) into a paste and apply.

Home remedies for 'Headache due to exposure to cold air':
Mix 1 teaspoon finely ground cinnamon (dalchini) in 1 teaspoon water and apply on the affected parts. Headache on one side w Powder equal quantities of liquorice (mulathi) and cumin (jeera). Take ¼ teaspoon every day along with 1 teaspoon honey for a month. Mix 1 teaspoon each of the following powders and store: camphor (kapoor), nutmeg (jaiphal), cardamom (chhoti illaichi) and cloves (laung). Take 2 pinches with warm water. Heart attack w Take ½ teaspoon garlic (lasan) powder every day.

Home remedies for 'Heart burn':
Add 1 tablespoon mint (pudina) leaves to 1 cup water. Take twice or thrice a day.

Home remedies for 'Heart pain':
Boil ½ teaspoon sandalwood powder in 1 cup water. Drink thrice daily.

Home remedies for 'Heart palpitation':
Boil ¼ teaspoon powdered cardamom (chhoti illaichi) seeds in thin tea water and drink.

Home remedies for 'Heart problem':
Eat ¼ teaspoon asafetida (hing) along with one large raisin (kishmish) every day. Heart weakness w Regular intake of ripe bananas strengthens the heart.

Home remedies for 'Heat exhaustion':
Apply some sandalwood oil on the forehead.

Home remedies for 'Heat stroke':
Have the cooling drink 'panna'. To prepare this, cook unripe or green mangoes in hot ashes. Extract the pulp and mix with water and sugar. You may even pressure cook the mangoes if you cannot make provision for the ashes.

Home remedies for 'Heels having pain':
Mix equal amounts by weight of carom seeds (ajwain), onion seeds (kalaunji) fenugreek seeds (methi daana) and saboot isabgol. Have 1 tablespoon every day first thing in the morning. If you like you can grind them slightly in the mixer - makes it more effective. This treatment takes a couple of months but is a sure shot remedy.

Home remedies for 'Hepatitis':
1 to 2 teaspoon fresh juice of coriander (dhania) leaves is mixed in 1 cup buttermilk and taken 2-3 times.

Home remedies for 'Hiccups':
Drink ½ glass water, slowly. w Keep a teaspoon of sugar in your month and suck slowly. Swallow ½ teaspoon mustard seeds (sarson) mixed with ½ teaspoon pure ghee. Grind 4 cardamom (chhoti illaichi) well. Boil it in 2½ cups or ½ litre water. When about 1 cup water remains, remove from fire and sieve it through a muslin cloth. Let it cool. When warm, drink a glassful. Works like magic. Suck 2-3 small pieces of fresh ginger (adrak). This helps in hiccups which keep occurring again and again.

Home remedies for 'High Blood Pressure':
Restrict salt intake and drink plenty of fluids (at least 8-10 glasses of water daily) Drink curry leaves (curry patta) juice initially 3 times a day (1 glassful) for 1- 2 months and then reduce to only once in the morning. Have it on empty stomach. For taking out juice: fill your mixy with washed curry leaves, add ½3/4 glass water. Churn well and sieve. Add ½ - 1 lemon juice and drink fresh. Have single pod garlic (lasan), one pod first thing every morning or if this is not available, have 1-2 cloves of ordinary garlic (lasan). If you get discomfort with having garlic first thing in the morning, have 2 cloves twice a day - swallow with water any time or with meals. Mix 1 teaspoon honey, 1 teaspoon ginger (adrak) juice, 1 teaspoon cumin (jeera) powder. Have twice a day. Go on an apple diet for a few days. It has a diuretic effect and thus brings down the B.P. Fruits such as mausami, orange, peaches (aaru), plum (aloo bukhara), watermelon (tarbooz) are also beneficial. Having rice, particularly brown rice as the main staple food is very beneficial. As rice has very low sodium content and low cholesterol, it is a perfect diet for those who have been advised to have low salt diets. Consumption of natural diuretics like coconut water, butter milk, coriander (dhania) juice (make from green coriander in the same way as curry leaves juice) is very beneficial. Last but not the least, rest, relaxation and good sleep are effective in keeping B.P. under control. Drink coriander (dhania) juice made from fresh dhania (same way as curry leaves juices) 3 times a day. If this is not effective, start having fenugreek (methi) juice instead (made from fresh methi) and if this is also not effective, move to curry leaves juice. Drink each juice for 10-12 days at least before you decide. If it is not working and then move to the next one.

Home remedies for 'pain and inflammation':
Consuming 1/2 to 1 1/2 tsp. of turmeric per day should start providing noticeable benefits after four to eight weeks.

Home remedies for 'pain and soreness':
Mix 3 tbsp. of cayenne powder with 1 cup of coconut. Heat the oil on a low simmer until it melts. Stir the mixture thoroughly for 5 minutes. Remove from heat and pour into a bowl. Let it firm up. Massage onto skin when cooled.

Home remedies for 'pain and nausea':
Grate half an inch of raw ginger. Boil 2 cups of water and pour over ginger. Let sit for 5 to 10 minutes. Add juice from a lemon, and add honey or agave nectar to taste.

Home remedies for 'oil and pain relief':
Eucalyptus oil and Vick’s VapoRub can help relieve pain. However, inhaling eucalyptus oil isn’t for everyone. This oil can trigger asthma and may be harmful to pets. It may also lead to respiratory distress in infants.

Home remedies for 'migraine and anxiety':
Inhaling lavender can help with that. Drinking lavender tea or keeping a satchel around for times of high stress is one way to reduce anxiety and relax the mind and body.

Home remedies for 'muscle pain':
Applying wintergreen can feel like a cool “burn” before the numbing effect takes place. This effect helps with joint and muscle pain.

Home remedies for 'stomach & gastric problems':
A flake of garlic swallowed with water taken empty stomach daily in the morning can be helpful.

Home remedies for 'chronic constipation or indigestion':
Eat, before breakfast, half a cup of cooked beets.

Home remedies for 'acne and blackheads':
rated cucumber applied over the face, eyes, and neck for fifteen minutes is very beneficial.

Home remedies for 'dark circles':
Tomato paste is one of the most effective remedies for dark circles. You can make it easily at home. Take one or two fresh tomatoes, one tablespoon of lemon juice and a pinch of gram flour and turmeric powder. Blend these ingredients nicely until they become a thick paste and apply it very gently around your eyes. Rinse it off gently with clean water after 10 or 20 minutes. Repeating this process twice or thrice every week will make your skin tone around your eyes lighter and will eventually make your dark circles go away completely.

Home remedies for 'ear pain':
A drop garlic juice into your ear helps to relieve the pain.

Home remedies for 'hangover':
Banana milkshake with honey can give you immense relief. Cold milk soothes the stomach lining and bananas with honey build up depleted blood sugar levels.

Home remedies for 'dry and itchy skin':
Take an oatmeal bath. Oatmeal has anti-itch, anti-inflam­matory, soothing properties, and it improves the skin’s direct barrier. The starch and fibre in oatmeal also help draw moisture to the skin.

